.\" Copyright © 2023 Ron R Wills <ron@digitalcombine.ca>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice,this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 1, 2023
.Dt LCHATD 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lchatd
.Nd Local chat daemon and dispatcher
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl s | -socket Ar path
.Op Fl u | -user Ar user
.Op Fl g | -group Ar group
.Op Fl w | -work-directory Ar path
.Nm
.Fl V | -version
.Nm
.Fl h | -help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a simple, configuration free,
.Em IRC-ish
chat server that dispatches messages over a local Unix socket for a single
computer/server.
Ideally the target for this software is for headless servers allowing admins
and other users to easily communicate on the console.
.Pp
There is no real protocol involved, what you type is what is send over the
socket.
To send a message to everyone, simple send a line of text terminated by the
newline character.
.Pp
Similar to IRC, the chat daemon understands a few command that start with the
.Em /
character.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "/quit, /exit"
The server will close the connection.
.It Sy /who
Returns a list of the current users in the chat room.
The list starts with
.Em ~
so clients can easily identify it to update any user lists it might display.
For example the /who command may return:
.Em ~ root john paul george ringo
.It Sy "/version, /about"
Displays version information about the server.
.It Sy "/msg, /priv, /query user message..."
Sends a private message to the given user.
.It Sy /help
Displays a simple help screen.
.El
.Pp
Messages sent from the dispatcher to the clients may have some simple
punctuation prepended to it, indicated the source of the message.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Em sender\&:
Normal message sent to all the users from
.Em sender .
.It Em sender\&:
.It Em ^receiver\&:
Private message sent from
.Em sender .
When a private message has the
.Em ^
symbol before the
.Em receiver's
name the message was sent by the user and returned to the user by the
dispatcher to keep the conversation displayed by the client consistent.
.It Em \&?
Help message sent by the chat server.
.El
.Pp
Everything else is considered system information, usually the server responding
to a server command.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d | -daemon
Puts the program in the background as a system daemon.
.It Fl s | -socket Ar path
Specifies the
.Ar path
to the chat servers Unix socket file.
The default path is
.Em /var/lib/lchat/sock .
.It Fl u | -user Ar user
Specifies the user to change the Unix socket to and if possible change the uid
for
.Nm
as well.
If
.Nm
is started with root privileges and this option
is not specified then the option
.Fl u
.Ar nobody
is the default.
.It Fl g | -group Ar group
Specifies the group to change the Unix socket to and if possible change the gid
for
.Nm
as well.
This should be set to a group for login users only and prevent other system
services from being able to access the chat service.
.It Fl w | -working-directory Ar path
Set the working path for the daemon.
Ideally, this should be set to the directory where the Unix socket is found.
The default is
.Em /var/lib/lchat .
.It Fl V | -version
Displays version information.
.It Fl h | -help
Displays a very brief help screen.
.El
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr lchat 1
.Sh AUTHORS
Written by
.An Ron R Wills
